---
title: "An Ethical Decision-Making Framework with Serious Gaming: Smart Water Case Study on Flooding"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/Water-Ethics-Web-Engine
excerpt: 'This paper introduces an open web framework to build crowd-sourced decision models for ethical dilemmas in water resources.'
date: 2021-05-01
venue: 'Journal of Hydroinformatics'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.2166/hydro.2021.097'
citation: '<b>Gregory Ewing</b>, Ibrahim Demir; An ethical decision-making framework with serious gaming: a smart water case study on flooding. Journal of Hydroinformatics 1 May 2021; 23 (3): 466–482. doi: https://doi.org/10.2166/hydro.2021.097'
---
Sensors and control technologies are being deployed at unprecedented levels in both urban and rural water environments. Because sensor networks and control allow for higher-resolution monitoring and decision making in both time and space, greater discretization of control will allow for an unprecedented precision of impacts, both positive and negative. Likewise, humans will continue to cede direct decision-making powers to decision-support technologies, e.g. data algorithms. Systems will have ever-greater potential to effect human lives, and yet, humans will be distanced from decisions. Combined these trends challenge water resources management decision-support tools to incorporate the concepts of ethical and normative expectations. Toward this aim, we propose the Water Ethics Web Engine (WE)2, an integrated and generalized web framework to incorporate voting-based ethical and normative preferences into water resources decision support. We demonstrate this framework with a ‘proof-of-concept’ use case where decision models are learned and deployed to respond to flooding scenarios. Findings indicate that the framework can capture group ‘wisdom’ within learned models to use in decision making. The methodology and ‘proof-of-concept’ system presented here are a step toward building a framework to engage people with algorithmic decision making in cases where ethical preferences are considered. We share our framework and its cyber components openly with the research community.